Basics
SQL, often pronounced "see-quell", stands for Structured Query Langauge and is the language used to query relational databases. Although you may have never actually worked with a relational database, you are probably already very familiar with their structure and concepts, likely through working with spreadsheet programs like Excel. To review, here are some of the basic ideas.
A relational database is a database that organizes information into one or more tables. 
Tables consist of named columns and zero or more rows. Tables are sometimes refered to as relations. 
Columns contain a data type (integer, float, string, etc...)
A row is a single record in the table. Rows may be indexed by a primary key which is a column, or a set of columns, used to uniquely identify each row.

SQL Statements:
      A statement is text that the database recogmizes as a valid command. Statements always end with a semi-colon (;).
      For example:
            CREATE TABLE table_name (
                  column_1 data_type, 
                  column_2 data_type, 
                  column_3 data_type
            );
            
            is a statment. This particular statment creates a new table in the database. For instance:
            
            CREATE TABLE celebs (
                  id INTEGER, 
                  name TEXT, 
                  age INTEGER);
                  
            creates a new table named "celebs" with "id" as its first column with data type "INTEGER", "name" as the second 
            column with "TEXT" as the data type, and "age" as the third column with data type INTEGER



Import a csv file: 
Before getting into writing queries, we first need to load some data. We're going to use the mtcars dataset that is often used in R and Python examples. If you need a copy of the .csv, it can be downloaded here, and it may be a good idea to familiarize yourself with the data a bit before proceeding. Also, be sure that all columns have a name. Once you have the data, put it in the same directory as this notebook. Now open up a command prompt in your OS, navigate to the directory containing the data, and run the command sqlite3. You should now see a sqlite3> indicating that the server is running and ready for commands. Now enter the following into the sqlite3 console.

      .mode csv
      .import /Users/davidhull/Desktop/mtcars.csv mtcars
      
Now lets select 10 columns from the dataset mtcars: 

      SELECT * FROM mtcars LIMIT 10; 
      
   -The * is the "wildcard" character and can be read as "all" in this context. It allowsi us to select every column in a
    table without having to specify each column
  
   -FROM species which table (mtcars) we are slecting from
   
   -LIMIT allows you to specify the number of rows you want to include.
   In english the statement reads, "select all columns from table mtcars limited to 10 rows."
   
   
But this doesn't include the headers. So to add the deaders we run: kty pu

      .mode columns
      .headers on 
      
      SELECT * FROM mtcars LIMIT 10; 
  
To order the data we run: 
      
      SELECT * FROM mtcats ORDER BY mpg DESC LIMIT 10; 
      
Notice that for ORDER BY we had to specify the column we wanted to sort on as well as DESC which stands for decending               since the default in SQLite is ascending order. Often we are not interested in all the columns in the data, so we just need to specify to SELECT which ones we are interested in.

We can also specify which variables to choose: 

      SELECT name, cyl, hp, wt, mpg FROM mtcars ORDER BY mpg DESC LIMIT 10;
      
Say we want to know hp, wt, mpg for 6 cylinder vehicles:
      SELECT name, cyl, hp, wt, mpg
      FROM mtcars
      WHERE cyl = 6
      ORDER BY mpg DESC
      LIMIT 10; 
   
      Notice that here we will break our query accross several lines. This can be still copy and pasted into the sqlite3      console as long as the statement is terminated with a ;.

The where clause uses most of the conditional operators you are familiar with (>, <, !=, etc...) For a full list, consult the       documentation. We can also apply multiple filters in the same WHERE clause. For example:

      SELECT name, cyl, hp, wt, mpg 
      FROM mtcars 
      WHERE cyl = 6 AND mpg >= 20
      ORDER BY mpg DESC 
      LIMIT 10;
      
       Note that SQLite does not use the & or | operators you may be familiar with coming from a programming background.                  Another useful keyword, especially for data science, is CASE which can be used to code certain classes of rows:
       
            SELECT name, cyl, hp, wt, mpg,
                CASE WHEN mpg < 15 THEN 'low'
                     WHEN mpg < 20 THEN 'med'
                     WHEN mpg > 20 THEN 'high'
                END
                     AS class
           FROM mtcars  
           LIMIT 10;
           
   Note that AS is used to name objects in SQL. For example AS renames the column 'names' to 'car'
       
       
            SELECT name AS car, cyl, hp, wt, mpg,
                CASE WHEN mpg < 15 THEN 'low'
                     WHEN mpg < 20 THEN 'med'
                     WHEN mpg > 20 THEN 'high'
                END
                     AS class
            FROM mtcars  
            LIMIT 10;


Left off at GROUP BY and Aggregate Functions pu2









      
      
      
      
      
